RFC: Establish an RFC process (#2)
lf-lang/rfcs: README.md

  infrastructure, this should be done in another process, as specification
  incurs a considerably larger overhead. Assuming that we establish a
  specification process, RFCs could still play a role in it, e.g., for early
  discussion of additions to the specification.
- Establishing a waterfall model for software design. While RFCs could be
  interpreted as specifications, they explicitly are not. On the contrary, RFCs
  are intended as a tool for iterating on ideas quickly and more frequently,
  even before there is an implementation.
- Discussing complete implementations. For this, we have PRs.

## The RFC Process
[The RFC Process]: #the-rfc-process

In brief, we use GitHub pull requests to implement the RFC process. This
repository contains all accepted (active) RFCs. To propose a new feature, you
draft a design document following our [template](0000-template.md) and open a
pull request to ask for comments. The PR will be reviewed by the stakeholders
and other interested parties. You help to address concerns and incorporate
suggestions in the document. At some point, we will decide to merge the PR, in

> which case the RFC becomes active, or close the PR, in which case the RFC is

Reviewer: IIUC, the "active" state for a RFC means something like "accepted in principle by the community". But it says nothing of the implementation status of the feature, right? After the RFC has been implemented, does the RFC stay "active", or should it have another state, like "delivered"? Or is this state supposed to be captured by the state of the tracking issue?

Author: Good question. I would say the tracking issue captures this sufficiently. Probably we just have to see how this goes. It only really becomes a problem once we have a bunch of accepted RFCs, and we can always fine tune when we notice a problem.

Reviewer: True, this will not be a problem from the start. Thanks for your reply

assign a [shepherd](#role-of-the-shepherd) to your PR to help manage the
remaining process. A shepherd will request reviews from
relevant stakeholders and community members that are affected by or generally
interested in the RFC.

#### Addressing feedback

The reviewers will share their valuable thoughts and opinions and evaluate the
RFC based on the [acceptance
criteria]()https://github.com/lf-lang/.github/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md#acceptance-criteria.
Aim to address this feedback and, if necessary, make changes to the RFC in order
to help reach an agreement. The shepherd may help to moderate the discussion if
needed.

Not every concern raised by a reviewer is an indication of a bad design and
requires a significant change to the RFC. No solution is perfect, and usually,
there are trade-offs involved. Thus, addressing a concern can be as simple as
acknowledging it as a drawback in the RFC document. Again, timeliness and
frequent iteration are more important than being perfect.

If the RFC is discussed during a meeting, notes and a summary of the meeting
should be shared as a comment in the PR thread.

#### Final comments and decision

> After the discussion settles down, the shepherd sends out a final call for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the discussion settles down, the shepherd announces the start of a final comment
```

> comments (FCP) with a disposition to accept or reject the RFC. The FCP lasts 7

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
period (FCP) with a disposition to accept or reject the RFC. The FCP lasts 7
```

days and is announced both on the community mailing list and the [`#rfc` Zulip
channel](https://lf-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/425418-RFCs). The
announcement should include the RFC title and abstract as well as a link to the

> PR. After the FCP period ends, the maintainers

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PR. After the FCP ends, the maintainers
```

# Lingua Franca RFCs
[Lingua Franca RFCs]: #lf-rfcs

The RFC (request for comments) process is a framework for managing both

> historical and planned changes within the LF community. The record of active

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
historical and planned changes to the Lingua Franca toolchain. The record of active
```

> RFCs tells the story of our project, our technology and our thought process. We

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
RFCs tells the story of our project, our technology, and our thought process. We
```

believe in an honest and open dialog between all contributors and stakeholders
within the community. The RFC process establishes accountability, helps to
identify and navigate disparate goals, and builds confidence in the direction
the language and the tooling are evolving in.

Many changes, including bug fixes and documentation improvements, can be
implemented and reviewed via the normal GitHub pull request workflow. However,
some changes are more substantial and we ask to put them through a bit of a
design process. In particular, changes that impact the syntax or the semantics
of the Lingua Franca language.

## TL;DR

> Follow these steps to open a new RFC:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To open a new RFC, follow these steps:
```

1. Fork or clone this repository.
2. Copy [`0000-template.md`](0000-template.md) to `rfcs/0000-my-feature.md`,
   replacing `my-feature` with a descriptive short name for your proposal.

> 3. Fill in the current date in the top section, but leave the RFC PR and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Enter the current date in the top section, but leave the RFC PR and
```

   tracking issue unchanged for now.

> 4. Fill in the sections of the template to start your proposal and push your

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Provide content for the sections of the template to start your proposal and push your
```

  perfect.
- Establish a record of the relevant design considerations and decisions. This
  is an important piece of documentation, as it allows us to find and reference
  past design considerations and is a valuable resource for new contributors.
- Provide a process that allows all contributors and stakeholders directly
  affected by the proposed change to comment and participate in the decision
  process. For substantial changes to the semantics or the textual and graphical
  syntax of the language, the community as a whole should be involved.
- Make submitting RFCs enjoyable. Ideally, the RFC process should be perceived as
  a supporting tool that helps submitters to assess the feasibility of an idea
  early on (before sinking time into an implementation) and by helping to
  improve the design.

### Non-Goals

- Slowing down development unnecessarily, creating significant overhead, or
  requiring wide consensus on every decision. The process should be flexible
  enough to adapt to the concrete scope and impact of a proposal, and only
  involve the stakeholders directly impacted by the community.
- Specification or even standardization of language features and interfaces. If

>   we decide to create specifications for certain aspects of the language and the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  we decide to create specifications for certain aspects of the language or the
```

repository or to your own fork. Share the link to your new file with your peers
to invite others to collaborate on the proposal or ask for early feedback.
Ideally, this involves one of the more senior contributors, who can help to avoid
larger pitfalls. If you are new to the community and don't know whom to reach out
to, drop a message in our [Zulip](https://lf-lang.zulipchat.com/). The proposal
does not need to be perfect (timely is more important than perfect), but you
should clearly identify any gaps that you are aware of.

At this early stage, using git and GitHub is merely a suggestion. You may also
choose other forms of exchanging ideas with your peers and collaborating on a
text document.

#### Opening a pull request

Once you have built trust in your proposal and are ready to receive feedback
from a wider audience, it is time to open a pull request on this repository.
Once you have opened the PR, replace `0000` in the file name of your RFC with
the PR number and insert a link to the PR at the top of your RFC.

Opening a PR will allow the stakeholders and interested community members to
review your proposal and raise concerns or make suggestions. We will also

> assign a [shepherd](#role-of-the-shepherd) to your PR who helps manage the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
assign a [shepherd](#role-of-the-shepherd) to your PR to help manage the
```

> remaining process. At this stage, the shepherd should request reviews from

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
remaining process. A shepherd will request reviews from
```

relevant stakeholders and community members that are affected by or generally
interested in the RFC.

#### Addressing feedback

The reviewers will share their valuable thoughts and opinions and evaluate the
RFC based on the [acceptance
criteria]()https://github.com/lf-lang/.github/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md#acceptance-criteria.
Aim to address this feedback and, if necessary, make changes to the RFC in order
to help reach an agreement. The shepherd may help to moderate the discussion if
needed. The acceptance criteria provide a guideline on

> Make changes as new commits to the pull request, and leave a comment on the pull

Reviewer 2: Do we really want to insist on this? I think this comes at the risk of getting a messy history and would prefer people would be expected to use common sense.

request explaining your changes. Specifically, do not squash or rebase commits
after they are visible on the pull request.

Not every concern raised by a reviewer is an indication of a bad design and
requires a significant change to the RFC. No solution is perfect, and usually,
there are trade-offs involved. Thus, addressing a concern can be as simple as
acknowledging it as a drawback in the RFC document. Again, timeliness and
frequent iteration are more important than being perfect.

If the RFC is discussed during a meeting, notes and a summary of the meeting
should be shared as a comment in the PR thread.

#### Final comments and decision

After the discussion settles down, the shepherd sends out a final call for
comments (FCP) with a disposition to accept or reject the RFC. The FCP lasts 7
days and is announced both on the community mailing list and the [`#rfc` Zulip
channel](https://lf-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/425418-RFCs). The
announcement should include the RFC title and abstract as well as a link to the

> PR. At the next developer meeting after the FCP period ends, the maintainers

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PR. After the FCP period ends, the maintainers
```

will discuss the RFC and reach a decision.

#### Accepted RFCs

If the RFC is accepted, the shepherd announces the new active RFC on the
community mailing list and in the [`#rfc` Zulip channel](https://lf-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/425418-RFCs).

> Furthermore, the shepherd creates an issue (or issues) that tracks the

Reviewer 2: I would leave this as a recommendation or leave it out. This relies to much on discipline and is too costly if we try to enforce it.

delegate this task to the RFC author or another person that would be responsible
for implementing the RFC.

#### The role of the shepherd
[The role of the shepherd]: #role-of-the-shepherd

The shepherd is a trusted individual who understands the community well and
knows the major stakeholders. Typically, this will be a
[maintainer](https://github.com/orgs/lf-lang/teams/maintainers). During the RFC
process, the shepherd acts as a moderator and is responsible for identifying and
notifying the relevant stakeholders. The main task of the shepherd is to steer
the discussions towards a conclusion. The shepherd also decides when to start
the FCP period to bring the RFC to the attention of the maintainers who make the
final decision.

## Implementation of active RFCs
[Implementation of active RFCs]: #implementation-of-actions-rfcs

Once an RFC becomes active, anyone may submit an implementation of the feature
as a pull request to the relevant repo. Being active, however, does not
guarantee that an implementation of the feature will ultimately be merged; it
does mean that, in principle, all the major stakeholders have agreed to the

> feature and are amenable to merging it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
feature would like to see it realized. Approval of the PR also depends on other factors like code quality, testing, etc.
```

may deviate from the initial design where needed (this is even encouraged!).
Please document those deviations in the implementation PR. Active RFCs may also
be modified in a follow-up pull-request to incorporate new insights. However, if
a more significant change to the design is required, a new RFC should be created
with a note added to the original RFC.

A core idea of the RFC process is to think about the implications of a new
feature and its design early on, and to receive feedback quickly and frequently.
This helps to identify potential concerns and major roadblocks before investing
in a concrete implementation. However, it might be helpful to support arguments
for or against an RFC with a prototype implementation. For some high-priority
features, it might also be required to work on the implementation alongside the
RFC. However, if you decide to invest in an implementation before the RFC
becomes active, the existence of this implementation and the work that you put
in do not present arguments against concerns raised by the RFC reviewers.

## When you need to follow this process
[When you need to follow this process]: #when-you-need-to-follow-this-process

> You need to follow this process if you intend to make any semantic or syntactic

Reviewer 2: I think we might be a bit too strict here. I can suggest a rewrite of this paragraph.
